# Linux Filesystem basics

## 1. What is a Filesystem?

- A filesystem is a method and data structure that an operating system uses to control how data is stored and retrieved on a storage device (like a hard drive, SSD, or USB drive).
- Without a filesystem, data stored on a storage device would be one large block of data with no way to tell where one piece of information stops and the next begins.
- By organizing data into files and directories, filesystems make it easy to locate and access specific pieces of data.

## 2. Common Linux Filesystems

### 2.1.  Different types of filesystems supported by Linux

- Linux supports a wide variety of filesystems, each designed for different use cases and storage devices.
- Some of the most common types include:
  - Conventional disk filesystems: ext3, ext4, XFS, Btrfs, JFS, NTFS, vfat, exfat, etc.
  - Flash storage filesystems: ubifs, jffs2, yaffs, etc.
  - Database filesystems.
  - Special purpose filesystems: procfs, sysfs, tmpfs, squashfs, debugfs, fuse, etc.

### 2.2. Partitions and Filesystems

- A partition is a defined storage space on a physical storage device that can be formatted with a filesystem.
- A single physical storage device (like a hard drive) can be divided into multiple partitions, each of which can be formatted with a different filesystem.
- This allows for better organization and management of data, as well as the ability to run multiple operating systems on the same device.
- A filesystem is just a method of storing and accessing files.

### 2.3. The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard

- Linux systems store their important files according to a standard layout called the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS), which has long been maintained by the Linux Foundation.
- For more information, take a look at the following document: "Filesystem Hierarchy Standard" created by LSB Workgroup. - Having a standard is designed to ensure that users, administrators, and developers can move between distributions without having to re-learn how the system is organized.
- Linux uses the ‘/’ character to separate paths and does not have drive letters.
- Multiple drives and/or partitions are mounted as directories in the single filesystem.
